# Flower Classification

```elixir
Mix.install([
  {:axon, "~> 0.5.1"},
  {:nx, "~> 0.5.3"},
  {:explorer, "~> 0.6.1"},
  {:kino, "~> 0.10.0"},
  {:kino_explorer, "~> 0.1.8"}
])
```

## Introduction

Flower Classification problem from Chapter 1 of "Machine Learning in Elixir"

### Links

[Axon Documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/axon/Axon.html)

[Nx Documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/nx/Nx.html)

[Explorer Documentation](https://hexdocs.pm/explorer/Explorer.html)

[Variance - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variance)

```elixir
require Explorer.DataFrame, as: DF
alias Explorer.Series
```

## Working With Data

```elixir
iris = Explorer.Datasets.iris()
```

Now the `iris` dataset needs to be normalized to ensure input features operate on a common scale with our model.

One way to normalize your dataset is by **scaling** your data.

You can squeeze the values of a features between 0 and 1 by dividing every individual feature by the maximum value of that feature column and then subtracting the minimum value.

You can compute the **z-score** for each feature which represents a datapoints deviation from the average datapoint in a feature space. Significantly positive or negative **z-scores** indicate that a value is significantly higher or significantly lower than the rest of the data in the distribution. This is typically referred to as the process of **standardization**.

Now let's standardize the `iris` dataset

```elixir
normalized_iris =
  DF.mutate(
    iris,
    for col <- across(["sepal_width", "sepal_length", "petal_length", "petal_width"]) do
      {col.name, (col - mean(col)) / variance(col)}
    end
  )
```

Notice that our data is sorted by `species`. In the real world we will not have this gaurentee therefore we can "shuffle" our data so that our training loop is fair

```elixir
shuffled_normalized_iris = DF.shuffle(normalized_iris)
```

In order to prove that our model works well before we use it in production a common practice is to use a test or *holdout* set. This is typically a small percentage of the original dataset which you do not present to the model during training. We will use the performance on the test set as the final evaluation of performance on our flower classification task

```elixir
train_df = DF.slice(shuffled_normalized_iris, 0..119)
```

```elixir
test_df = DF.slice(shuffled_normalized_iris, 120..149)
```

Before you can train the model you need format the data in a way your model will understand. In Elixir this is done with the `Nx` library and more specifically using a `Nx.Tensor`.

A `Nx.Tensor` is the common data structure shared among all libraies in the `Nx` ecosystem.

So you will perform the conversion: `Explorer.DataFrame` -> `Nx.Tensor`

The `DataFrame` that represents our `iris` dataset has both *categorical* features such as `species` which we want our model to predict. *Categorical* features are typically represented using integers or *one-hot encoding*. **One-hot Encoding** produces a `Nx.Tensor` with `n` columns with every value being a `0`, meaning "off", with the exception of the index of the class which is a `1`, meaning "on". Below is a simplified example of a *one-hot encoded* representation

```elixir
# class 0
[1, 0, 0]
```

```elixir
# class 1
[0, 1, 0]
```

```elixir
# class 2
[0, 0, 1]
```

Now performing *one-hot encoding* for our dataset

```elixir
feature_columns = [
  "sepal_length",
  "sepal_width",
  "petal_length",
  "petal_width"
]
```

```elixir
label_column = "species"
```

```elixir
x_train =
  train_df[feature_columns]
  |> Nx.stack(axis: 1)
```

```elixir
train_categories =
  train_df["species"]
  |> Series.cast(:category)
```

To *one-hot encode* our categorical dataset you can use `Series.cast/2`, providing `:category` as the `dtype`. Below is a simplified example

```elixir
categories = ["a", "b", "c", "a", "a", "e"]

Series.from_list(categories)
|> Series.cast(:category)
|> Nx.stack(axis: -1)
|> Nx.equal(Nx.iota({1, 4}, axis: -1))
```

```elixir
y_train =
  train_categories
  |> Nx.stack(axis: -1)
  |> Nx.equal(Nx.iota({1, 3}, axis: -1))
```

```elixir
x_test =
  test_df[feature_columns]
  |> Nx.stack(axis: 1)
```

```elixir
test_categories =
  test_df["species"]
  |> Series.cast(:category)
```

```elixir
y_test =
  test_categories
  |> Nx.stack(axis: -1)
  |> Nx.equal(Nx.iota({1, 3}, axis: -1))
```

## Training The Model

You now have your data in a shape that a model can understand.

Training a ML model in Axon can be summarized in the following steps:

1. Define the model
2. Create an input pipeline
3. Declare and run the training loop

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Defining The Model

A "model" in the context of ML can be thought of as a function. A model takes data in and gives a value out. In this example, you will use `Axon` to create a basic multinomial logistic regression model

```elixir
model =
  Axon.input("iris_features")
  |> Axon.dense(3, activation: :softmax)
```

You can visualize your model with `Kino` and `Axon.Display.as_graph/2`

```elixir
model
|> Axon.Display.as_graph(Nx.template({1, 4}, :f32))
```

### Create an Input Pipeline

Axon implements minibatch training with *gradient descent*. This means that Axon's training API performs updates to the model iteratively. The training API steps through a dataset in "batches" or smaller groups of examples.

The `iris` dataset is small but `Axon` still requires a data structure that allows it to grab data for multiple steps over a given training run. This is done with the `Stream` module.

```elixir
input_train =
  Stream.repeatedly(fn ->
    {x_train, y_train}
  end)
```

This data stream will send `Axon` and input in the form `{features, targets}` which are the train features and train targets respectively. Here `x_train` is the features and `y_train` is the targets.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Declare and Run The Training Loop

`Axon.Loop` is the primary API for training models with graident descent. A training loop is the process of:

1. Grabbing inputs from input pipeline
2. Making predictions from inputs
3. Determining how good the predictions were
4. Updating the model based on how good the predictions were
5. Repeat

```elixir
trained_model_state =
  model
  |> Axon.Loop.trainer(:categorical_cross_entropy, :sgd)
  |> Axon.Loop.metric(:accuracy)
  |> Axon.Loop.run(input_train, %{}, iterations: 500, epochs: 50)
```

### Evaluating the Trained Model

```elixir
data = [{x_test, y_test}]

model
|> Axon.Loop.evaluator()
|> Axon.Loop.metric(:accuracy)
|> Axon.Loop.run(data, trained_model_state)
```
